---
layout: post
title: 'METSIM EWAS'
caption: Epigenome-wide association in adipose tissue from the METSIM cohort
date: '06-03-2018'
site_map: false
sitemap: false
hide_last_modified: true
---


# [Epigenome-wide association in adipose tissue from the METSIM cohort](https://academic.oup.com/hmg/article/27/10/1830/4939377)

The Pellegrini lab in collaboration with several other research groups recently published a paper where we investigated the link between metabolic traits and epigenetic changes in adipose tissue, see the paper abstract below. 

*Most epigenome-wide association studies to date have been conducted in blood. However, metabolic syndrome is mediated by a dysregulation of adiposity and therefore it is critical to study adipose tissue in order to understand the effects of this syndrome on epigenomes. To determine if natural variation in DNA methylation was associated with metabolic syndrome traits, we profiled global methylation levels in subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue. We measured association between 32 clinical traits related to diabetes and obesity in 201 people from the Metabolic Syndrome in Men cohort. We performed epigenome-wide association studies between DNA methylation levels and traits, and identified associations for 13 clinical traits in 21 loci. We prioritized candidate genes in these loci using expression quantitative trait loci, and identified 18 high confidence candidate genes, including known and novel genes associated with diabetes and obesity traits. Using methylation deconvolution, we examined which cell types may be mediating the associations, and concluded that most of the loci we identified were specific to adipocytes. We determined whether the abundance of cell types varies with metabolic traits, and found that macrophages increased in abundance with the severity of metabolic syndrome traits. Finally, we developed a DNA methylation-based biomarker to assess type 2 diabetes risk in adipose tissue. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that profiling DNA methylation in adipose tissue is a powerful tool for understanding the molecular effects of metabolic syndrome on adipose tissue, and can be used in conjunction with traditional genetic analyses to further characterize this disorder*

As part of this effort I developed a type II diabetes biomarker. The current gold standard to assess the risk of developing type II diabetes is an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), which measures the ability of the body to process glucose. A popular alternative to an OGTT is to measure hemoglobin A1C protein (HbA1C) levels. While these measures work well for designating those at risk of developing type II diabetes, integrating information from multiple clinical features may be a better way to assess risk. To this end, I developed an integrated measure of type II diabetes risk by combining multiple clinical traits measured in the METSIM cohort.  This integrated measure of type II diabetes (PC1) is able to distinguish healthy individuals from individuals who received a type II diabetes; importantly though, individuals who were healthy when they enrolled in the cohort but were diagnosed with diabetes at a follow-up examination 4-5 years later have an intermediate PC1 value between healthy and type II diabetes. This suggest that this integrated measure may be useful for predicting those at risk for developing type II diabetes. When compared to an OGTT (AUC=0.89,0.88) or HbA1C levels (AUC=0.79), PC1 (AUC=0.94) more accurately assesses the type II diabetes status of individuals in the METSIM cohort. I then fit a penalized regression model to methylation data that predicted the measured PC1 value reasonably well. Please see the paper for more details. 


**A methylation biomarker to assess type II diabetes. (A) Kernel density estimates of principal component 1 by type II diabetes status at baseline and follow-up examination for METSIM participants who received follow-up examination in the testing dataset (n = 2422). Healthy individuals had not been diagnosed with type II diabetes at baseline or follow-up examination, type II diabetes follow-up individuals had not received a type II diabetes diagnosis at baseline but were diagnosed by follow-up examination, and type II diabetes baseline individuals received a type II diabetes diagnosis before or at baseline examination. (B) A combined type II diabetes feature, PC1, outperforms individual features for classification of diabetes at baseline or follow-up examination among METSIM participants in the testing dataset who received follow-up examination (n = 2422). (C) Measured and predicted PC1 values for a single cross-validated regression model fit to 18 CpG sites.**


### References

1.  Luz D Orozco,  Colin Farrell,  Christopher Hale,  Liudmilla Rubbi, Arturo Rinaldi,  Mete Civelek,  Calvin Pan,  Larry Lam,  Dennis Montoya, Chantle Edillor,  Marcus Seldin,  Michael Boehnke,  Karen L Mohlke, Steve Jacobsen,  Johanna Kuusisto,  Markku Laakso,  Aldons J Lusis, and Matteo Pellegrini; Epigenome-wide association in adipose tissue from the METSIM cohort. Human Molecular Genetics 0, 223495 (2018).